{:title "Monads, part zero: Flavours of abstractions"
 :layout :post
 :tags ["monad-tutorial"]}

It's come to my attention that the internet is lacking in monad tutorials, so
I've decided to write my own. In this first, preliminary part, we'll look at
different flavours of abstractions in order to explain what flavour a monad is.

I'm using "flavour" here for a bunch of things with some common properties
because "class", "type", "kind" and "category" all have very specific meanings
in related computer science fields and I want to avoid confusion. I am not
trying to draw any kind of analogy with taste buds.

### What is an abstraction?

Before we try to dive into different flavours of abstractions, let us first
attempt to formalize what an abstraction is. We'll start by taking a look at
the well-known "stack" abstraction.

In Java, the `Stack` abstraction could be defined as an interface
along the lines of:

```java
public interface StackMut<T> {
    void put(T t);
    T pop();
}
```

If we wanted to make it immutable, we could also define it as:

```java
public interface StackIm<T> {
    StackIm<T> put(T t);
    StackIm<T> pop();
    T peek();
}
```

In both cases, there are two very important things missing from that code:

- How do we _create_ a stack?
- What properties of these two/three functions make this a "proper" Stack?

Let us contrast these with example interfaces for the queue abstraction.
Mutable:

```java
public interface QueueMut<T> {
    void put(T t);
    T pop();
}
```

Immutable:

```java
public interface QueueIm<T> {
    QueueIm<T> put(T t);
    QueueIm<T> pop();
    T peek();
}
```

Hopefully this should make it obvious that a Java interface does not capture
the real essence of the abstraction we are trying to define here. This is not
an attempt to diss Java: I don't know of any language that does it better.

Here is an example of how the same two abstractions could be defined in
Haskell:

```haskell
class Stack s where
  put :: s e -> e -> s e
  pop :: s e -> s e
  peek :: s e -> e
  make :: s e
```

and

```haskell
class Queue q where
  put :: q e -> e -> q e
  pop :: q e -> q e
  peek :: q e -> e
  make :: q e
```

Beside the difference in syntax (things are a bit more explicit: the class
`Queue` can be applied to a type `q` if we define a `put` function that takes a
`q` with elements of type `e` and a `e` and returns a new `q` with elements of
type `e`, and a function `pop` that takes a `q` with elements of type `e` and
returns a `q` with elements of type `e`, etc.), the main difference here is
that Haskell does let us make the constructor an explicit part of the
abstraction itself. But still no visible difference except for the names.

The crucial difference between a Stack and a Queue is in the expected dynamic
behaviour of sequenced calls to the methods they define. For the purpose of
this blog post, we'll call this a protocol.

The protocol for stacks could be illustrated by the following example "trace":

```java
StackMut<Integer> s = new <...>;
s.put(1);
s.put(2);
s.put(3);
s.pop(); // 3
s.pop(); // 2
s.pop(); // 1
```

whereas the behaviour of a queue would be:

```java
QueueMut<Integer> q = new <...>;
q.put(1);
q.put(2);
q.put(3);
q.pop(); // 1
q.pop(); // 2
q.pop(); // 3
```

I am not going to attempt a formal definition of either protocol, but,
informally, the stack abstraction requires that a call to `pop` returns the
argument passed to the **most** recent call to `put` that has not yet been
popped, whereas the queue abstraction requires that `pop` returns the argument
passed to the **least** recent call to `put` that has not yet been popped.

A more complete formalization of those protocols would require addressing the
case where there is no element to pop, but here we'll just gloss over that.

As a working definition, we'll say that an abstraction is composed of three
parts:

- A (possibly parametric) _type_,
- A set of _functions_ acting on that type,
- A protocol that defines the expected results of sequences of calls to said
  functions on said type.

Now, let us move on to flavours.

### The thing

The first flavour we'll discuss is what I call a _thing_. _Object_ would
probably have been a better name here (literally "the thing we talk about"),
but like kind, category, class and type, it's a bit too loaded with meaning for
my tastes.

The _thing_ is what we're talking about. When you write code using a thing
abstraction, you write most of your code against that one abstraction and, even
though you know there could be different implementations of it, you think of
the abstraction as the thing you're manipulating.

Code that works with a stack is usually written against a Stack interface
directly, i.e. with no knowledge at all of what the actual implementation will
be. The abstraction is the entire thing you are concerned with.

This is the most opaque, hiding, encapsulating type of abstraction. Stacks,
sets, queues and maps are usually in this category.

### The temporary mask

Another common flavour of abstraction, at least in languages with subtyping, is
the parent, which I'll call _temporary mask_. Think of the typical OO example of
representing a zoo of animals with an Animal superclass and a subclass for each
animal species.

In such a system, there will be _some_ code written against the Animal type,
but the vast majority of the code will want to know exactly which type of
animal it is dealing with. Still, it's useful to know that the thing you're
dealing with _is_ an Animal, and you may rely on some of the Animal properties.

Another example of this flavour of abstraction is the sequence abstraction in
Clojure. It has two methods (`first` and `next`) and is often used to traverse
all manners of collections (and collection-like things, such as network sockets
or files). In some cases you'll be writing code that really just cares about
the sequence abstraction (in which case you'll treat it as _the thing_), but in
most code we know what the real (or at least "a more concrete") type is.

This flavour of abstraction is typically used to indicate that a thing can
temporarily act like another (more abstract) thing.

### The extra property

Some abstractions are really just an add-on, a marker for extra properties of a
thing. A typical example in Java would be the `Serializable` interface, which
is characterized by the fact that it has no attached method.

A more interesting one for our purposes here is the `AutoCloseable` interface.
This is an interface that only contains one method, `close()`. You will very
rarely write any code directly against the `AutoCloaseable` interface, but
almost any code that uses an autocloseable _thing_ will call `close()` at some
point.

This is also the flavour of monads. The Monad abstraction is very rarely
treated as a _thing_, which I believe is what makes it so hard to explain and
understand at first. The Monad abstraction is an "extra property" flavour of
abstraction.

### Monad

The monad abstraction can be defined in Haskell as:

```haskell
class Monad m where
    (>>=) :: m a -> (a -> m b) -> m b
    return :: a -> m a
```

Unlike the other abstractions we've discussed, `Monad` does have a formal
defintion for its protocol, which can be expressed in the loosely Haskell-like
notation:

```haskell
return a >>= h  === h a
m >>= return    === m
(m >>= g) >>= h === m >>= (\x -> g x >>= h)
```

I'll walk through the definition and protocol in more details in a future post.
In this post, what I want to get across is that a monad is typically not a
_thing_ itself, but a set of properties that something else has, just like
`AutoCloseable`.

The Java language has special syntax for `AutoCloseable` in the form of the
so-called "try-with-resources" statement:

```java
try (BufferedReader br = new BufferedReader(new FileReader(path))) {
    return br.readLine();
}
```

This is only syntactically valid because `BufferedReader` (the _thing_) also
has the _extra property_ `AutoCloseable`, and that makes the above semantically
equivalent to:

```java
BufferedReader br = new BufferedReader(new FileReader(path));
try {
    return br.readLine();
} finally {
    if (br != null) br.close();
}
```

In Haskell, `Monad` is similarly special. If `M` is an instance of the `Monad`
type class, one can write the following code:

```haskell
code_block :: M Int
code_block = do
  a <- m_add 4 5
  b <- m_add a 3
  return (a + b)
```

and it will be semantically equivalent to:

```haskell
code_block :: M Int
code_block = m_add 4 5 >>= (\a -> m_add a 3 >>= (\b -> return (a + b)))
```

At this point, we know two things:

- "Monad" itself is an incomplete abstraction; it very rarely exists by itself
  and is generally more a set of properties that something else has.
- Haskell has special syntax for things that are monads, just like Java has
  special syntax for things that are autocloseable.

In the next post, I'll explain what a monad is, what its protocol means and why
that might be useful.
