{:title "A short overview of DNS"
 :layout :post
 :tags []}

I've recently changed DNS provider for this blog, and that forced me to look
into how DNS works a bit closer. I did manage a DNS server for a couple years
circa 2006, but I have to say I'd forgotten most of it. In case I forget it
again, I'm recording my notes here.

## DNS zone

A DNS "zone" is a set of records. There are various types of records; in
general, a record is essentially a line of text of the form:

```
domain ttl class type data
```

The class is usually IN (standing for "internet"). There are many types; some
common ones are `A`, `MX`, `NS`, and `TXT`. `A` records indicate the IP address
of the server corresponding to the listed domain; `MX` records indicate the
address (usually as a domain name) of the mail server to send emails @ that
domain to; `NS` records indicate the name servers for the listed domain; and
`TXT` records are free-form text. The TTL (time to live) is a number of seconds
during which the entry can be cached.

The DNS zone for a given domain can include entries for subdomains, which is
why the domain is part of the record. For example, these two records are part
of the one zone for `cuddly-octo-palm-tree.com`:

```
cuddly-octo-palm-tree.com.        30    IN    A    52.204.159.248
www.cuddly-octo-palm-tree.com.    30    IN    A    52.204.159.248
```

There are two other common types of records: `SOA` records declare the "start
of authority" for a domain (more on that below), and `CNAME` records are
essentially redirects: their `data` field is a domain name, and they assert
that in order to resolve the IP address of the domain on the left, you should
resolve the `A` record for the domain on the right.

It is bad form for the data field of a `CNAME` entry to point to a domain name
that itself ultimately results in a `CNAME` record; good DNS practice would
limit the number of such redirections to a single one. Also note that DNS
requests ask for specific records, so it's the responsibility of the client to
know to ask for a `CNAME` record if the request for the `A` record fails.


## Caching server

A DNS "name server" is a system that serves DNS records, i.e. an IP address
that responds to DNS queries. Queries come in the form of domain + type, i.e.
"please give me the `A` record for `example.com`". If the server has that in
its own cache, it checks when it got it and whether that's more seconds ago
than the TTL. If it is not, it means the entry is still valid, so it serves it.

If the server does not have a fresh-enough response, it needs to fetch it.
There may be multiple levels of caching here; many DNS servers have another DNS
server configured as a fallback. But, ultimately, we'll reach a point where we
need to query the authority on that domain. This is where the hierarchical
nature of DNS comes in.

## Authoritative server

DNS segments read from right to left: `images.example.com` is a subdomain of
`example.com` which is a subdomain of `com`. If *sub*domains are thought of as
being *under* their domain, it makes sense that the last segment is called a
*top-level* domain. There is a finite, well-known list of top-level domains
(TLDs), administered (the list) by ICANN.

Imagine you are a DNS server trying to resolve the IP address (i.e. the `A`
record) for `images.example.com`. Who do you ask? There are a handful of
well-known [root servers], so that's where you should start. They, in essence,
are considered to have the authority over all public DNS.

Servers can, through `NS` records, _delegate_  authority for subdomains to
other servers. The root servers delegate to the TLDs, which delegate to
individual DNS servers, which can in turn delegate further, and so on. The
system assumes you start by querying the root servers and work your way down,
and it's the responsibility of the server to tell you when you can stop because
_it_ thinks it's the authority for the domain you're querying.

This may be a bit surprising so let me reiterate: a server being authoritative
over a domain is something the server itself asserts. "Parent" servers redirect
requests, but do not specifically assert that the servers they send to have
authority, just that they might know more.

In practice, though, you do expect that, if you follow the redirections from
the root servers down, you'll end up at a server that asserts its authority,
and, conversely, that if a server asserts authority over a (public) DNS domain,
it is a server you can reach by working your way down from the root servers. In
both cases, possibly after multiple levels of redirection.

## DNS requests

Let's walk through a hypothetical example of trying to resolve the A record for
`images.example.com`, and let us assume that the zone for `images.example.com`
is stored in `ns2.example.com`, while the zone for `example.com` is stored in
`ns1.example.com`.

DNS responses are not just a line with a single record. They are structured
messages with multiple sections, among which `QUESTION` (DNS goes over UDP, not
TCP, so it's useful to have the question repeated), `ANSWER`, and `AUTHORITY`.
A DNS response also contains a number of flags, of which the most important for
our discussion here is the `aa` flag, which is set when the server sending the
response considers itself in a position to give an authoritative answer.


The first request our hypothetical resolver would send would be to one of
the [root servers] (assuming we're in the context of resolving public DNS), and
it would ask for the entirety of the query (i.e. the resolver does not
explicitly deconstruct the domain itself, and instead lets servers do that).

The root server would send back a response in which the `ANSWER` section is
empty, because it does not consider itself the authority on the
`images.example.com` domain. That response also does not have the `aa` flag
set. In the `AUTHORITY` section, the response will have a list of servers the
root server thinks may be able to answer, in this case a list of DNS servers
that the root server believes may know more about the `com` domain. If we're
lucky (this will be the case for the root servers, but may not always be true
as we move down the chain) the response will also contain an `ADDITIONAL`
section with the `A` (and `AAAA`, which are like `A` but for IPv6 addresses)
records for the domains listed in `AUTHORITY`, saving us a recursive-trip to
resolve them.

The next two steps would be similar: we send the same request for an `A` record
to one of the servers suggested by the response from the root server, which
will similarly send back a non-authoritative response that contains
`ns1.example.com` in its `AUTHORITY` section, its IP address in the form of an
`A` record in the `ADDITIONAL` section, and an empty `ANSWER` section. The
response from `ns1.example.com` will, again, be similar, and send us to
`ns2.example.com`.

Finally, the response from `ns2.example.com` would generally not contain either
an `AUTHORITY` or an `ADDITIONAL` section, but just an `ANSWER` section with
the actual records requested. Importantly, that response would have the `aa`
flag set, indicating that the resolver can cache it (for the duration of the
TTL).

This lets us look at `NS` records in a slightly different way depending on
where they appear. When they appear in a parent zone, they are _delegation_
records, indicating that maybe you should look over there for your answer. When
they appear in the zone itself, they are _authority_ records, which clients are
expected to cache. The DNS server serving the response knows it's the authority
because of the `SOA` record it has.

Every DNS zone should have an `SOA` record.[^soa] Among other uses, this record will
be returned in the `AUTHORITY` section of a DNS response that does not yield
any result (i.e. when asking for a record that does not exist). For example,
for this blog, the zone is defined on `cuddly-octo-palm-tree.com` with no
subdomain (i.e. no `NS` entry). Requesting a non-existent domain below that
yields:

```plaintext
$ dig this.does-not-exist.cuddly-octo-palm-tree.com @ns-582.awsdns-08.net. +norec

; <<>> DiG 9.10.6 <<>> this.does-not-exist.cuddly-octo-palm-tree.com @ns-582.awsdns-08.net. +norec
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NXDOMAIN, id: 43820
;; flags: qr aa; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 0, AUTHORITY: 1, ADDITIONAL: 1

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 4096
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;this.does-not-exist.cuddly-octo-palm-tree.com. IN A

;; AUTHORITY SECTION:
cuddly-octo-palm-tree.com. 900  IN      SOA     ns-582.awsdns-08.net. awsdns-hostmaster.amazon.com. 1 7200 900 1209600 86400

;; Query time: 59 msec
;; SERVER: 205.251.194.70#53(205.251.194.70)
;; WHEN: Sun Oct 17 20:44:42 CEST 2021
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 155

$
```

Try it at home! You can start with

```plaintext
$ dig this.does-not-exist.cuddly-octo-palm-tree.com @a.root-servers.net +norec
```

and follow the responses. The `+norec` flag tells `dig` not to recurse itself,
so you can have the joy of doing it manually.

[^soa]: Every DNS provider I've ever used filled that record for me, so I've
  never had a reason to dig very deeply into its internal structure.

## Registrars

TLDs are often owned by entities with no desire to interact directly with DNS
users, or to host a DNS server for their TLD. I imagine the details may vary
from TLD to TLD, but, in general, people who want to register a domain name
(registrants) under a TLD need to go through a _registrar_ that has an existing
relationship with the corresponding TLD owner.

Registrars make sure the very first step in DNS resolution works. The details
are not super important here, but the registrar can be thought of as managing
the DNS zone of the TLD, with the special case that that zone only contains
`NS` entries.

That is, of course, not _all_ a registrar does: the bulk of their work is to
keep track of who owns each domain name, following the rules of ICANN as well
as the additional constraints imposed by the TLD (e.g. the `eu` TLD mandates
that domain holders be EU residents).

Registering a domain name is generally not very useful unless you also have a
server hosting your zone. Most "DNS providers" will serve both roles and do the
"tell your registrar about your zone" step for you, but it is definitely
possible for the registrar and the DNS name server host to be separate
entities. In that case, the registrant needs to tell the registrar the names of
the DNS servers that host the zone, essentially replicating the `NS` record for
the domain.

## `hosts` file

End-user devices are generally configured to look for DNS entries in two steps.
First, there is a `hosts` file somewhere (`/etc/hosts` on Unix systems,
`C:\Windows\System32\drivers\etc\hosts` on Windows) that takes absolute
priority. This is a simple text file where each line is an entry with two
space-separated fields, where the first field is an IP address and the second
field is a domain name. Any request for a domain name present in the `hosts`
file will resolve to the IP address on the same line.

This may or may not be how "end-of-caching-chain" DNS servers resolve TLDs.

If an address is not in the `hosts` file (which should be the vast majority of
them), then the device will send a DNS query to its configured DNS server(s).
For most consumer devices those are set automatically to their ISP's DNS
servers through the DHCP protocol, but that can be overridden. In either case,
the DNS servers are designated by their IP address, as specifying a name for
them would be a bit recursive. In a bad way.

The `hosts` file is very useful for temporary testing, but in general it
shouldn't be relied upon too much as it gives you a different view of the
internet from everyone else's.

## `curl` DNS override

I recently discovered that the `curl` command has a CLI flag that lets you
override DNS resolution. This is a great alternative to a temporary change to
the `hosts` file as it does not require root access and there is no risk to
forget to set things back.

The flag is `--connect-to domain:port:IP:port`, and it will resolve `domain` to
`IP` (and map `port` to `port`, though I generally set those to the same value,
as you might have guessed) without going through any DNS resolution.

## Conclusion

That's it: my working knowledge of how DNS works. It's a bit fuzzy in some
places, but it's been good enough to let me "make things work" so far.

If any of the above is blatantly wrong, please let me know.

[root servers]: https://root-servers.org
