{:title "Data-first API design: Why I still prefer Clojure"
 :layout :post
 :tags ["clojure"]}

I used to be a Clojure programmer. I've been using it as my main programming
language from the first time I took a serious look at it in early 2012 up until
the end of 2019, when I decided to check out the competition.

I joined a company with a strong static typing culture in what was meant to be
a full-time Haskell position. For the past three years, I've tried really hard
to understand the benefits of static typing and category theory, and, while
I've learned a lot, I still tend to fall back to Clojure whenever I contemplate
starting a new project. (One that is not specifically aimed at learning more
Haskell, that is.)

Today, I want to talk about one of the best features of Clojure. What I find
particularly interesting about it is that it is mostly a cultural thing; while
Clojure has slightly better support for it than most other languages, it
_could_ be done in any language.

As the title suggests, I am talking about data-first APIs.

## What do you mean, data?

The software engineering community as a whole is suffering from a bad case of
jargon fragmentation. What Clojure developers mean when they say "data" is not
readily translated to what other communities hear. Or, rather, it is readily
translated to a slightly different notion.

This is not unique to "data"; a lot of seemingly technical words have slightly
(or sometimes completely) different meanings depending on the community you're
a part of. These communities are mostly built around languages.

In Clojure, "data" (hereafter "Clojure data") means any combination of a
handful of core data types:

- Atomic data types (numbers, symbols, keywords, strings, booleans, nil).
- Lists.
- Vectors.
- Maps.
- Sets.

The latter four are collection types which can nest arbitrarily with each other
and have heterogenous content.

Of course, the notion of a data type is itself somewhat language-dependent, but
hopefully we can gloss over that in this discussion.

What makes those types so useful at representing Clojure data is the
homoiconicity of the language: all of these types have a direct, unambiguous
mapping to a literal (text-based) representation, which means that Clojure
data, as in arbitrary combinations of those types, can be serialized to text.
This in turn means it can be saved to disk, sent over a network, and more
importantly deserialized to the same "value" on the other side (even across
Clojure versions).

They also have sane equality semantics that the programmer can rely on, as well
as a host of functions in the Clojure standard library to manipulate them in
useful ways. And because the majority of most Clojure programs consists of
manipulating Clojure data, most Clojure programmers are pretty familiar
with a lot of these functions and therefore find manipulating such data _easy_.

## Data-first API

The Clojure community has an aphorism that goes:

> Data > Function > Macro.

What this means is that, as a general rule, one should design APIs (be they
network APIs or library APIs) to use data where possible, functions where data
**cannot** be used, and macros only to achieve things that are impossible to
build with functions and data. (This makes macros fairly rare in Clojure code
overall.)

It also means that, ideally, if a function is provided, it's only a convenience
wrapper around a data representation of the API, and if a macro is provided,
it's only a convenience wrapper around a set of functions.

So the ideal API has one function that takes in a big blob of data, and then
optionally a few functions to, say, simplify the API for some common, simple
cases, and finally perhaps a macro or two to simplify usage of these functions
in the most common cases.

## A concrete example

As a concrete example of the data-first approach, we can take a look at the
[tools.cli] Clojure library. From its README, here is an example usage:

```clojure
(ns my.program
  (:require [clojure.tools.cli :refer [parse-opts]])
  (:gen-class))

(def cli-options
  ;; An option with a required argument
  [["-p" "--port PORT" "Port number"
    :default 80
    :parse-fn #(Integer/parseInt %)
    :validate [#(< 0 % 0x10000) "Must be a number between 0 and 65536"]]
   ;; A non-idempotent option (:default is applied first)
   ["-v" nil "Verbosity level"
    :id :verbosity
    :default 0
    :update-fn inc] ; Prior to 0.4.1, you would have to use:
                   ;; :assoc-fn (fn [m k _] (update-in m [k] inc))
   ;; A boolean option defaulting to nil
   ["-h" "--help"]])

(defn -main [& args]
  (parse-opts args cli-options))
```

The library essentially exposes a single function, which takes in the actual
parameters the user typed and a data representation of what options are
expected. This library goes even further as it also returns data.

How else would one go about designing a library to parse CLI arguments? Let's
take a look at the Haskell one we use at work: [optparse-applicative]. The
README also starts with an example usage:

```haskell
import Options.Applicative
import Data.Semigroup ((<>))

data Sample = Sample
  { hello      :: String
  , quiet      :: Bool
  , enthusiasm :: Int }

sample :: Parser Sample
sample = Sample
      <$> strOption
          ( long "hello"
         <> metavar "TARGET"
         <> help "Target for the greeting" )
      <*> switch
          ( long "quiet"
         <> short 'q'
         <> help "Whether to be quiet" )
      <*> option auto
          ( long "enthusiasm"
         <> help "How enthusiastically to greet"
         <> showDefault
         <> value 1
         <> metavar "INT" )

main :: IO ()
main = greet =<< execParser opts
  where
    opts = info (sample <**> helper)
      ( fullDesc
     <> progDesc "Print a greeting for TARGET"
     <> header "hello - a test for optparse-applicative" )

greet :: Sample -> IO ()
greet (Sample h False n) = putStrLn $ "Hello, " ++ h ++ replicate n '!'
greet _ = return ()
```

At first glance, this looks very similar. The definition of the `sample` parser
is similarly declarative and, like `cli-options` in Clojure, essentially lays
out the options in a fairly readable format. As a bonus, we get to define the
shape of our option map (here `Sample`), and get static type checking on it.

The main focus of the optparse-applicative library is to provide a nice API to
create parser descriptions, and it succeeds at that. Using those descriptions
to then parse the actual CLI args is fairly trivial. One does need to
understand how the Applicative typeclass works in Haskell to use it, but that's
a fair assumption for a Haskell library, given how central that typeclass is to
the language.

Before we move on, let's look at a third library targeting the same space, this
time in the Scala language, [scopt]:

```scala
import java.io.File
case class Config(
    foo: Int = -1,
 // ...
    kwargs: Map[String, String] = Map())

import scopt.OParser
val builder = OParser.builder[Config]
val parser1 = {
  import builder._
  OParser.sequence(
    programName("scopt"),
    head("scopt", "4.x"),
    // option -f, --foo
    opt[Int]('f', "foo")
      .action((x, c) => c.copy(foo = x))
      .text("foo is an integer property"),
    // more options here...
  )
}

// OParser.parse returns Option[Config]
OParser.parse(parser1, args, Config()) match {
  case Some(config) =>
    // do something
  case _ =>
    // arguments are bad, error message will have been displayed
}
```

Again, we have a layout that broadly resembles our previous examples. One of
the big differences here is the `action` field, which contains a function that
will be run with the option. In a language that does not track effects, this
can be a dangerous (or useful) feature.

## Advantages of data-first

On the face of it, these three libraries may seem broadly similar. For the
simple use-cases illustrated in the README, ignoring the syntactic differences
between their host languages, there doesn't seem to be a huge differentiating
factor between them.

One small advantage I could claim for the Clojure one is that it's only using
the default Clojure syntax for Clojure data: as a programmer, I know how that
syntax works and can focus on the semantics the library assigns to that data.
On the Haskell and Scala sides I would have to understand all of the functions
and objects involved, how they can or cannot be combined, etc. While I do
believe there is some truth in that argument, I also do not think it's a very
convincing one, especially given that it seems intricately tied to the lack of
type safety of the Clojure approach. Depending on individual sensitivities,
it's not clear that that tradeoff is always worth it.

But what if the use-case becomes more complex? Some applications can get away
with a straight-up CLI definition like that, but some have different
requirements.

The main advantage of a data-first approach is flexibility. Not so much for the
API deisgner, but for programs using the API.

Say you needed to enforce a rule that no CLI argument can be
longer than 16 characters. It's immediately obvious to any Clojure programmer
how to write a function that walks down `cli-options` and checks that. Here it
is:

```clojure
(defn check-arg-length
  [max-length opts]
  (every? (fn [[_ long-opt]] (<= (count long-opt) 16))
          opts))
```

Is it obvious to you how to do that on either the Haskell or Scala one? How do
you iterate over the options in a `Parser Sample` or an `OParser[Config]`?

The designer of the `tools.cli` package did not predict this use-case. It's not
that they have better foresight than the designers of the other two, but by
choosing a data-first approach, they have inherently given flexibility to their
users.

More importantly, as a user, I did not need to predict that use-case either. I
just used the API, which required me to have my configuration in a form I can
easily repurpose later on.

## Environment variables

Most applications support (or want to support) more than one source of
configuration. The typical set is environment variables, CLI args and
configuration file, with well-defined priorities between them if the same
option is set at different levels. Ideally, you'd want the set of options that
can be configured through each of these three input vectors to be the same,
with similar semantics and ideally similar names. Perhaps the environment
variable is the SCREAM_CASE version of the kebab-case long-form CLI arg, and
the config file uses snake_case because it's in JSON and someone forgot JSON is
not JavaScript.

Ideally, in that situation, you would want one "source of truth" and then
derive the other two (or all three) from that. Again, it's perfectly obvious to
a Clojure programmer how to navigate `cli-options` and use it to scan
environment variables, or map it to any number of configuration formats (YAML,
JSON, etc.) It's not all that obvious to me how to do that with any of the
other two.

In fact, [a few months back I tried to do just that][pr] with a Scala
application using scopt, and the only way it was even possible to get at the
option names from a parser was to use undocumented (though thankfully not
explicitly `private`) APIs and objects. The code looked something like:

```scala
private def parseConfig(args: collection.Seq[String]): Option[Config] =
   // was: configParser().parse(args, Config.Empty)
   configParser().parse(args, configFromEnv(getEnvVar))

trait ExposeData[C] {
    def optionDefs: Seq[scopt.OptionDef[_, C]]
}

// This existed before, but I added the `with` extension
private def configParser(): scopt.OptionParser[Config] with ExposeData[Config] =
  new scopt.OptionParser[Config]("app-name") with ExposeData[Config] {
    // options, as per README above
    // ...

    // Added this:
    override def optionDefs = options.toSeq
    // options is, thankfully, protected and not private
}

// ...

private def configFromEnv(): Config = {
  val ods = configParser().optionDefs.map(_.optional)
  val cliFromEnvVars = ods
    .map(_.fullName)
    .filter(_.length > 0)
    .filter(_ != "--help")
    .map(cli => (cli, cli.toUpperCase.replaceAll("-", "_").substring(2)))
    .map({ case (cli, n) => (cli, n, env(n))})
    .filter({ case (_, _, o) => o.isDefined})
    .flatMap({ case (cli, _, o) => Seq(cli, o.get)})
  val (config, _) = scopt.OParser.runParser(
      scopt.OParser(ods.head, ods.tail.toList),
      cliFromEnvVars,
      Config.Empty)

  config.getOrElse(Config.Empty)
}
```

In plainer English, here are the hoops I had to jump through:
- The data is not exposed at all by default, but is thankfully held in a
  `protected` variable, so we can extend the object and expose it. If it'd been
  private we'd have needed to resort to reflection to publish it.
- Make all arguments optional, because the `runParser` function returns an
  `Option[C]`, i.e. if a mandatory argument is missing we get `None`, instead
  of a helpful representation of the arguments that were actually there. At
  this point you should probably wonder if that `_.optional` call is mutating
  anything.
- `cliFromEnvVars` starts off sensible: we scan all the options (now that we
  have them), get their names, and turn that into environment-variable-friendly
  names. A minor annoyance here is that the names we get include the initial
  double-dash, so we have to remove that (that's what `.substring(2)` does).
- `cliFromEnvVars` does not stop there, however. The only way for us to reuse
  the existing parser definition we have is to build up a string that looks
  like a CLI invocation, based on the values we find in the environment, and
  then run the parser on that, yielding (hopefully) a `Config` object.
- Finally, we return said `Config` object to serve as the "default" value our
  actual CLI parsing starts from.

Note that if _any_ environment variable contains an invalid value (say, a
letter where a number is expected), this code will ignore _all_ environment
variables silently. One could of course do better here, but at the cost of more
efforts and code complexity.

Going the other way around is also annoyingly hard: if, instead, the CLI
definition is **not** the source of truth, how do you generate it?

In Clojure, assuming the source of truth is Clojure data (and contains all of
the required information), or someting that can easily be turned into it (JSON,
XML, etc.), it's trivial to write code that generates the representation
`tools.cli` needs, and that will be done using generic Clojure functions
to manipulate the same set of types you manipulate all the time. So either you
already know how to do it, making it fast and easy to do, or you learn things
that are broadly applicable to all Clojure code bases.

It's probably _easier_ to generate optparse-applicative and scopt definitions
than to parse them, but it's still going to require a bit of research in order
to gain knowledge that is completely specific to those two libraries and useful
nowhere else.

## Conclusion

It's not difficult to design a library API in a data-first way. It's a shift in
perspective, but it's not necessarily more work. (It's also a good excuse to
[write an interpreter][cwafi].)

To a large extent, it can even be done retroactively, with no breakage. One
could define a set of algebraic data types that represent all the options
optparse-applicative takes, and then a mini-interpreter to turn that data into
whatever the current form is. As we observed, the apparent shape of the code is
not all that different, so updating existing code would not be very difficult
either.

This is, in my opinion, the strongest feature of the Clojure language. As a
language, it makes it easy to design APIs in this way. In fact, it almost makes
it hard to do anything else. As a community, most people do follow the "Data >
Function > Macro" aphorism, which means that a lot of the APIs one interacts
with are data-driven.

But this is very much an approach you _can_ follow in any language. I think you
should, and hopefully this post shows you why. Do your users a service. Next
time you design an API, think in terms of data first. Their code will be better
for it.

[tools.cli]: https://github.com/clojure/tools.cli
[optparse-applicative]: https://github.com/pcapriotti/optparse-applicative
[scopt]: https://github.com/scopt/scopt
[pr]: https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/pull/9142/files
[cwafi]: /tags/cheap%20interpreter
