{:title "Monads, part one: <strike>What's a monad?</strike>"
 :layout :post
 :tags ["monad-tutorial"]}

If you've read [part zero], you know that the question "What is a monad?" is
not a very good one, because "monad" is not a _thing_, it's a set of
properties. A better question would be "what are the properties of a thing that
make it a monad?". This is the question I will answer in this post.

It will probably be a fairly unsatisfying answer. By the time you reach the end
of this post, you may be left wondering "Ok, so what? Why would I ever want to
do this? It looks like so much unnecessary extra complexity." Those questions,
specifically:

- Why should you use monads?
- When should you use monads?
- How do you make a monad?

will be addressed in future posts.

From [my previous post][part zero], we know that in order for a type to be a
monad, we need to define two functions operating on this type, namely `>>=`
("bind") and `return`. Their types are defined by:

```haskell
class Monad m where
    (>>=) :: m a -> (a -> m b) -> m b
    return :: a -> m a
```

and their protocol is defined by:

```
return a >>= h  === h a
m >>= return    === m
(m >>= g) >>= h === m >>= (\x -> g x >>= h)
```

What does it mean? If you're unfamiliar with Haskell notation, it may be
helpful to translate those to Java. Let's start with the `Monad` interface. A
first attempt could look like:

```java
import java.util.function.Function;

public interface Monad<A> {
    <B> Monad<B> bind(Function<A, Monad<B>> f);
    Monad<A> pure(A a);
}
```

We've changed the names: `>>=` is not a valid identifier in Java, so we
replaced it with its pronunciantion, while `return` is a reserved keyword,
so we used `pure` instead. This is not entirely arbitrary: the Haskell standard
library defines `pure` as an alias to `return`.

This does not look quite right, though. The `bind` function uses the object
itself as its first argument, such that the Haskell `ma >>= f` would correspond
to `ma.bind(f)`, but what does `pure a` translate to? In the Haskell version,
we don't have a monadic value to start with. The `pure` function should be a
constructor, and constructors are not part of Java interfaces. We could work
around that by defining two interfaces:

```java
import java.util.function.Function;

public interface Monad {
    <A> Monadic<A> pure(A a);
    interface Monadic<A> {
        <B> Monadic<B> bind(Function<A, Monadic<B>> f);
    }
}
```

but that gets tedious pretty quickly and doesn't offer much benefit. Let's just
leave `pure` out and assume that our types have constructors. The interface
becomes:

```java
import java.util.function.Function;

public interface Monad<A> {
    <B> Monad<B> bind(Function<A, Monad<B>> f);
}
```

Now, let us turn to the protocol. In pseud-Java, it could read:

```java
pure(a).bind(h)      === h.apply(a)
m.bind(a -> pure(a)) === m
m.bind(g).bind(h)    === m.bind(x -> g.apply(x).bind(h))
```

where `pure` is a stand-in for a constructor.

So what does this all mean? If `pure`/`return` is just a constructor, the core
meaning of "being a monad" must be in the `bind` method. Looking at the
protocol, the first line tells us that if we have a value "wrapped" in the
monad, we can "send a function into" the monad and apply it on the value. The
second line tells us that "sending" the constructor "into" the monad is a
no-op. And the third line tells us that, if we have two functions we want to
"send into" a monad, we can either send them one at a time, or first construct
a combination and send that, and the result will be the same.

At this point, it's probably still pretty nebulous. It has something to do with
functions and function composition, but let's take a look at a concrete example
to hopefully make all of that clearer.

One of the simplest monadic types is `Maybe`. It represents a potential value.
Java uses `null` by default to represent the absence of a value, but let us
assume that we don't like that approach and we want to be a bit more explicit.
`Maybe` could be defined as:

```java
public interface Maybe<A> {
    A get();
    static <A> Maybe<A> just(A a) {
        return new Maybe<A>() {
            public A get() {
                return a;
            }
        };
    }
    static <A> Maybe<A> none() {
        return new Maybe<A>() {
            public A get() {
                return null;
            }
        };
    }
}
```

That's not very useful, though. If the only operation is `get`, we haven't
gained anything. We could make explicit subclasses for `Just` and `None`, and
that would be marginally better, because we could now call `instanceof` on
them. However, turning:

```java
if (null == v) {
    ...
} else {
    ...
}
```

into

```java
if (v instanceof None) {
    ...
} else {
    ...
}
```

is hardly a win. If every operation has to check for `null`, checking for
`instanceof None` is not better. Now, let's imagine that it is ok for a
sequence of operations to return `null` if any operation in the chain returns
`null`. They will all have code that looks like:

```
if (null == v) { return null; }
else {
    ...
}
```

Now, switching to `Maybe` can seem a little bit better, because we have a fixed
implementation for what to do when the argument is `None`, which means we can
make use of polymorphism. If we redefine our `Maybe` interface to be:

```java
import java.util.function.Function;

public interface Maybe<A> {
    A get();
    <B> Maybe<B> bind(Function<A, Maybe<B>> f);
    static <A> Maybe<A> just(A a) { return new Just<>(a); }
    static <A> Maybe<A> none() { return new None<>(); }
    static class Just<A> implements Maybe<A> {
        private final A a;
        private Just(A a) {
            this.a = a;
        }
        public A get() { return a; }
        public <B> Maybe<B> bind(Function<A, Maybe<B>> f) {
            return f.apply(a);
        }
    }
    static class None<A> implements Maybe<A> {
        private None() {}
        public A get() { return null; }
        public <B> Maybe<B> bind(Function<A, Maybe<B>> f) {
            return new None<>();
        }
    }
}
```

we can now achieve that, to some extent. Let's take an example from arithmetic
for simplicity. Some operations are safe (subtraction, addition,
multiplication), but some are not, such as square root or division. We could
define "safe" functions that return a `Maybe`, and write:

```java
public class Arith {

    public static Maybe<Double> add(Double a, Double b) {
        return Maybe.just(a + b);
    }

    public static Maybe<Double> sub(Double a, Double b) {
        return Maybe.just(a - b);
    }

    public static Maybe<Double> mul(Double a, Double b) {
        return Maybe.just(a * b);
    }

    public static Maybe<Double> div(Double a, Double b) {
        return b == 0.0 ? Maybe.none() : Maybe.just(a / b);
    }

    public static Maybe<Double> sqrt(Double a) {
        return a < 0.0 ? Maybe.none() : Maybe.just(Math.sqrt(a));
    }

    public static Maybe<Double> sqr_inv(Double a) {
        return Maybe.just(a)
            .bind(x -> sqrt(x))
            .bind(x -> div(1.0, x));
    }

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Double d =
            Maybe.just(5.0)
            .bind(r -> add(r, 7.0))
            .bind(r -> sub(r, 2.0))
            .bind(r -> sqr_inv(r))
            .bind(r -> mul(r, 3.0))
            .get();
        System.out.println(d);
    }
}
```

where none of the arithmetic functions had to check whether its argument was
`null`.

Note that we did not make `Maybe` implement `Monad`. This is because, in order
for `Maybe` to work as expected, its `bind` method really has to return an
instance of `Maybe`, not a generic `Monad`. (Remember, "monad" is not a thing,
just a set of properties; in this case, the thing is `Maybe`.) This is not
specific to `Maybe` and will be true of any monadic type: `bind` needs to
return the monadic type, not a generic `Monad` instance. To the best of my
knowledge, there is no way to express that property on a Java interface, which
leaves us in a bit of an awkward place in terms of expressing monads in Java:
`return` cannot be part of the interface because it is a constructor, and
`bind` has a type that we cannot express generically.

The conclusion is simple: there is no way to express the concept of a monad in
terms of Java types. This does not, however, mean that we cannot _use_ monads
in Java: we have just demonstrated the use of `Maybe` as a monad.

To prove that our definition is indeed a monad, we can take another look at the
protocol, a.k.a. "the monad laws". The first law states that:

```
pure(a).bind(h) === h.apply(a)
```

In the case of our `Maybe` monad, `pure` is `just`. Looking at the code, we can
see that `just(a).bind(h)` will expand directly to `h.apply(a)`, so that one
checks out.

The second law states that:

```
m.bind(a -> pure(a)) === m
```

where `m` is either a `Just` or a `None`. If `m` is of type `None`, we know
that `none().bind(f)` is `none()` for any `f` (for any reasonable definition of
`.equals`[^equals]). If `m` is `just(x)`, then `just(x).bind(a -> just(a))` is `(a ->
just(a)).apply(x)` which is `just(x)`.

[^equals]: Left as an exercise for the reader.

Finally, the third law states that:

```
m.bind(g).bind(h) === m.bind(x -> g.apply(x).bind(h))
```

This requires a bit more of a case analysis as `None` may pop up at any stage.

- If `m` is `none()` to start with, the case is pretty simple. On the left,
  `none().bind(g).bind(h)` evaluates to `none().bind(h)` which evaluates to
  `none()`, while on the right, `none().bind(x -> g.apply(x).bind(h))` evaluates
  directly to `none()`.
- If `m` is `just(a)`, then `m.bind(g)` will evaluate to `g.apply(a)`, and the
  left side is `g.apply(a).bind(h)`. On the right side, `just(a).bind(x ->
  g.apply(x).bind(h))` evaluates to `(x -> g.apply(x).bind(h)).apply(a)` which
  evaluates to `g.apply(a).bind(h)`.

So we have one example of a thing that happens to have the monadic properties.
Let's try and explain monads in a slightly more precise way now. A monadic type
is a type that can carry out monadic computations, i.e. functions that take in
"naked" arguments and return values "wrapped" in the monadic type.

The monad laws ensure that you can compose monadic computations; in the `Arith`
example above, the third monadic law allows us to combine `sqrt` and `div` into
`sqr_inv`.

So that's it, that's all "a monad" is: a type `Type<A>` that has a
single-argument constructor and a `bind` function with the signature

```java
<B> Type<B> bind(Function<A, Type<B>> f);
```

Note that the monad abstraction _does not_ define any way to "get out". You can
send computations in by calling `bind`, but how you get anything out is defined
by the _thing_, not by its monadic properties. In this case we defined a simple
`get` method on `Maybe` that returns either a value or `null`, which is a
simple way to extract a value, but also a highly debatable choice if the whole
point of introducing the `Maybe` monad was to reduce `NullPointerException`s.

What does it mean to carry a computation? Well, it can mean a lot of things,
really. We can define a monad that keeps track of all the values it has seen:

```java

```


[part zero]: /posts/2021-04-11-monads-0
