{:title "Cheap interpreter, part 1: overview"
 :layout :post
 :tags ["cheap interpreter"]}

A few months ago, my former boss [Neil Mitchell][ndm] gave a talk entitled
"[Cheaply Writing a Fast Interpreter][cwafi]". It's a very good talk, and I
encourage you to watch it. The basic premise of the talk is that it is given to
people who already know many ways to write an interpreter, and the talk itself
is presenting the results of a study Neil and his team did to compare a number
of different techniques on their performance per cost ratio, where cost is
meant in terms of development and maintenance. The results presented should be
of great interest to anyone planning to write an interpreter for some practical
purpose.

I don't plan to write any real interpreter. What made the talk really
interesting to me is that I did _not_ know any of the techniques Neil
presented, so to me the talk served as a great roadmap of things to go play
with. And then write about, of course. This is the first in a series of posts
about what I learned.

## Parts of an interpreter

An interpreter is a program that takes in text that forms a valid program in
some programming language and executes it according to the semantics of said
language. Where the text comes from is not terribly important. Starting with
the point where we have some text, the major parts of an interpreter are:

- The _parser_ is a function that takes in some "flat" text and produces some
  form of structured _tree_.
- The _optimizer_ takes in the tree produced by the parser, and transforms it
  into another tree. There may be any number of intermediate passes over any
  number of intermediate trees.
- The _evaluator_ reads in a tree emitted by the optimizer and actually does
  stuff as instructed by the input program.

Naming is not very consistent across sources I've come across. "Parsing" as a
transformation of text to tree is by far the most widely accepted term I've
found. Coming in second would be "abstract syntax tree", in that any piece
about interpreters will mention the words, though they're not always in
agreement on what they mean. As mentioned, there can be any number of different
trees in-between the textual representation and the one that eventually gets
evaluated, and which one of these trees is _the_ abstract syntax tree is fairly
inconsistent.

Finally, in some cases the evaluator can modify the tree it is evaluating. This
happens in broadly two cases:

- If the language being evaluated is _dynamic_, it will have operations to
  modify its own tree at runtime.
- The evaluator may modify the tree for optimization purposes. This can be
  called an optimizing evaluator, or a JIT (standing for "just-in-time
  compiler", because it's fun to make acronyms that don't cover all the words).

There are complex interplays between these things; for example, if you have a
JIT, or a dynamic language, the role of the optimizer is a bit less clear. How
much optimization should you do at compile time if you also have the opportunity to
optimize at runtime? If you have a dynamic language, do you optimize the code
you start with? What about the code you add at runtime? How do you balance the
cost of running unoptimized code with the cost of running the optimizer at
runtime?

Other questions can crop up, such as how much of the program the optimizer
considers. Considering the whole program at once can give the optimizer a
better understanding of the program and therefore find better optimizations,
but it does not play well with adding code at runtime. It's also a bit
impractical as it means any change requires recompiling everything, which can
get slow.

## Compilers

Mathematically, a compiler is any program that transforms programs written in
language \\(A\\) into equivalent programs written in language \\(B\\).
Compilers don't require computers at all; the concept can be (and has been)
defined purely in terms of [Turing machines][turing]. There is no restriction
that \\(B\\) must be different from \\(A\\), or that \\(B\\) must be a specific
language.

[turing]: /posts/2021-05-30-imperative-turing

Still, when hearing "compiler", many programmers will think of a program that
generates machine code. In a way, this is just a special case of an
interpreter, where the evaluator is the CPU and the interpreter lets us
serialize the result of the optimizer to disk rather than running it directly.

In a more general sense, compilers will look a lot like interpreters, in that
there will be a parser that produces some tree, and then a series of steps that
transform a series of trees. The evaluation part is replaced by the emission of
a "flat" file that represents code in the target language.

## Parsing

I will not delve into much details on the parsing side in this series, because
this exploration was mostly about what happens _after_ parsing. Still, I can
give a few pointers.

In order to parse a language, one first needs to define a _grammar_ for it,
i.e. define how to form correct sentences in that language and what these
sentences mean. There may be many ways to do that, but, by and large, the world
has settled on something called [EBNF] to describe useful programming languages.

[EBNF]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extended_Backus–Naur_form

A grammar described in EBNF takes the form of a succession of _rules_, each of the form:

```plaintext
name = production
```

where `production` is either a literal (or, as a shorthand, a collection of
literals in the form of a regular expression) or a combination of literals and
other rules. For example, a simple grammar for arithmetic on integers could be
described by:

```plaintext
expr = term ('+' expr)?
term = factor ('*' term)?
factor = '(' expr ')' | nat
nat = #"\d+"
```

where `nat` represents natural numbers through a regular expression, `'+'`,
`'*'`, `'('` and `')'` are literal characters, (unquoted) parentheses represent
grouping, question mark reprents optionality and `|` represents disjunction.

On the following expression: `4+5*6`, this grammar would produce a parse tree
along the lines of (using Clojure syntax for trees):

```clojure
[:expr [:term [:factor [:nat "4"]]]
       "+"
       [:expr [:term [:factor [:nat "5"]]
                     "*"
                     [:term [:factor [:nat "6"]]]]]]
```

Going from an EBNF grammar to a program that can turn text into parse trees is
not exactly trivial, but not very hard either. Different languages have
different tools for that, but the one thing they all have in common is that
you're expected to have a well-defined EBNF grammar before your start writing
out your code.

It's probably important to mention that EBNF is not a single agreed-upon syntax
for decribing grammars, but a loose set of things that people generally agree
on in general. It's more like CSV than JSON. Every tool that reads "EBNF" will
read a slightly different flavour of it.

## Parser generators

In ye olden times, the grandparents of parsing technology were the tools known
as [lex and yacc] (and later [flex] and [bison]), which are based on
domain-specific languages and some notion of separating _parsing_ (forming
sentences out of _words_) from _lexing_ (identifying individual words). The
main parsing technology for Java, [JavaCC], is a direct descendant and is based
on the same ideas. The core principle seemed to be to annotate the EBNF grammar
directly with snippets of code, which after a couple decades people realized is
a really bad idea because it introduces way too much coupling.

More recent approaches tend to have a better separation between producing a
parse tree and acting on it, which gives the option of producing a tree once
and then having many different uses for it. In the Java world, [ANTLR] is
probably the most-widely used of those. Wheres JavaCC (and yacc and bison
before it) require the programmer to write a mix of Java (or C) and EBNF to
execute code as the parse progresses, ANTLR takes in what is essentially "just"
an EBNF grammar and generates both Java "data" classes to represent the parse
tree and Java code to turn a string into said tree.

In Clojure, the wonderful [instaparse] library can directly turn an EBNF
grammar into a parse tree; that is, in fact, what I used to produce the tree
above:

```clojure-repl
t.core=> (def gram
    #_=>   "expr = term ('+' expr)?
    #_=>    term = factor ('*' term)?
    #_=>    factor = '(' expr ')' | nat
    #_=>    nat = #'\\d+'")
#'t.core/gram
t.core=> ((insta/parser gram) "4+5*6")
[:expr [:term [:factor [:nat "4"]]] "+" [:expr [:term [:factor [:nat "5"]] "*" [:term [:factor [:nat "6"]]]]]]
t.core=>
```

Because the language is dynamic and has good builtin default vectors and
keywords, there is no code generation required. This is by far the easiest way
I know of to get started with writing a parser.

## Parser combinators

From the "purely functional" side comes a different way to approach writing a
parser known as "parser combinators". This is essentially a [monad-based DSL]
for parsing, where monadic sequencing is lexical sequencing.

Using Haskell notation, it can start with something like:

```haskell
newtype Parser tree = Parser (String -> Maybe (tree, String))

instance Functor Parser where fmap = liftM
instance Applicative Parser where pure = return; (<*>) = ap
instance Monad Parser where
  return v = Parser (\s -> Just (v, s))
  p >>= f = Parser (\s ->
    case parse p s of
      Nothing -> Nothing
      Just (v, out) -> parse (f v) out)

item :: Parser Char
item = Parser (\s -> case s of
                       [] -> Nothing
                       (x:xs) -> Just (x, xs))

failure :: Parser a
failure = Parser (\s -> Nothing)
```

and then, one can fairly easily build on top of that. For example, a parser
that reads three characters and discards the one in the middle could be written
as:

```haskell
p_1 :: Parser (Char, Char)
p_1 = do
  x <- item
  item
  y <- item
  return (x, y)
```

These are calld _combinators_ because one can create new parsers by combining
existing ones, either among themselves or with existing functions. For example,
creating a parser for a sequence of numeric characters can be done with:

```haskell
-- combinator that satisfies a boolean on a character
sat :: (Char -> Bool) -> Parser Char
sat p = do
  x <- item
  if p x then return x else failure

-- parser for a single digit
digit :: Parser Char
digit = sat isDigit

-- combinator that takes two parsers and matches the second if the first fails
(+++) :: Parser a -> Parser a -> Parser a
p +++ q = Parser (\s -> case parse p s of
                          Nothing -> parse q s
                          success -> success)

-- combinators that repeat any number of times
many :: Parser a -> Parser [a]
many p = many1 p +++ return []

many1 :: Parser a -> Parser [a]
many1 p = do
  v <- p
  vs <- many p
  return (v:vs)

-- Parser for a natural number
integer :: Parser Integer
integer = do
  xs <- many1 digit
  return (read xs)
```

Parser combinators do not require a separate EBNF grammar. It is possible to
define the operators in such a way that the grammar, expressed as combinators,
reads almost as easily as an EBNF description (adapted for the host programming
language, of course). Still, it is sometimes easier to reason about the grammar
on paper in EBNF and then use that to guide the code.

This approach is most popular in the Haskell and Scala communities, but parser
combinator libraries exist in many other languages.

## What makes grammars hard

Writing a grammar can be quite tricky, because one has to come up with rules
that are not ambiguous. That is, ideally, one would like that, for any given
input, there is either zero or one parse tree, but never more. It is very easy
to write "ambiguous" grammars, i.e. ones that can sometimes generate more than
one valid parse tree.

Another issue is non-termination. This is, in some sense, not different from
any recursive code, but it's very easy to end up with a recursive grammar that
does not terminate. Take the simple arithmetics grammar, for example. It could
have been tempting to just go for something like:

```plaintext
expr = expr (('+' | '*') expr)?
```

and that might seem mathematically correct, but a naive derivation would yield
a non-terminting program, and this grammar could generate multiple parse trees.
It's also not respecting the operator priority between `+` and `*`.

Both of these issues are somewhat fundamental to the expressive power of
grammars. But while they are both properties of the _grammar_, what's more
interesting is to think of them as properties of the _language_. As the
arithmetics example shows, there may be languages for which there are multiple
ways to express the grammar, some of which have non-termination issues and some
of which don't.

A lot has been written about how to design languages and the associated
grammars such that they do not end up having non-termination or ambiguity
problems, but that is way outside the scope of this blog entry.

## Languages as trees

There is a fairly simple answer, though, which in my eyes make grammars a
fairly uninteresting subject. Let's consider the following points:

- The goal of a grammar is to turn text into trees.
- The meaning of the program depends on the generated tree. Programmers care
  about the meaning of the program, and the harder it is to infer the tree from
  the text, the harder it is to understand the code.
- The harder it is to infer the tree from the program, the more complicated the
  grammar will be, and the harder it will be to get right.

It follows that the grammar that requires the least effort to understand for
users of the language is also the one that requires the least effort to
implement, and it is one that has a direct mapping to a tree. In other words,
it is a textual representation of a tree.

The oldest way to do that is the original Lisp syntax. This is in fact how the
Lisp syntax was invented: at the time, they wanted to experiment with language
semantics, not with syntax. They did have a ("non-Lisp") syntax defined, and
they were planning to implement a proper parser, but given limited resources
(both in implementation effort and in runtime cost) they chose to temporarily
go for a direct representation of the parse tree using parentheses. They then
discovered that this was actually quite a nice way to work and never got around
to adding the "real" parser.

Parentheses got a bit religious in the Lisp community, but they're really
beside the point. What matters is that there is a direct, easy-to-see,
unambiguous correspondence between the code and the underlying parse tree.
Clojure improved on the old model by realizing that and adding other types of
delimiters to "de-overload" the meaning of parentheses. Elixir decided to
eschew parentheses in favour of `do/end`. Parentheses are not the point; direct
tree representation is.

As the most effective syntax is also the easiest one to parse, I find it really
hard to get interested in how to write more complicated parsers for less
effective syntaxes. Why make it harder for both the language implementor and
the language user?

From the next post onward, I will completely ignore parsing and just assume I
have a parse tree.

[monad-based DSL]: /posts/2021-05-02-monads-3
[ANTLR]: https://dzone.com/articles/antlr-and-javacc-parser-generators
[lex and yacc]: http://dinosaur.compilertools.net
[flex]: https://github.com/westes/flex
[bison]: https://www.gnu.org/software/bison/
[JavaCC]: https://javacc.github.io/javacc/
[instaparse]: https://github.com/Engelberg/instaparse
[ndm]: https://ndmitchell.com
[cwafi]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V8dnIw3amLA
