{:title "Notes on Optimizing Clojure Code: Type Hints"
 :layout :post
 :tags ["clojure"]}

[Last week] I wrote about how reflection works in Clojure and how to avoid it.
The primary way to do that is through using appropriate _type hints_, but I
didn't go very deep into how and what those are.

There's a surprising amount to know about them, and I don't know of a good
unified resource on the topic, so here's my take on it.

### The REL

Clojure has been designed for interactive use from the ground up. This is most
visible in the REPL. Many languages have a _shell_, but lisps chose to call
theirs a REPL because they have explicitly separate Read, Eval, Print and Loop
steps. Most important is the separation between `read` and `eval`: `read` is a
function that takes in a string of characters and returns language-level data
structures, and `eval` is defined as acting on data structures.

Many languages have an "interpreter" for their interactive shell that is
separate from their "compiler" for final program production. Clojure does not
have such a separation: interactive REPL usage always goes through compilation,
and it is the same compiler running over files.

Ultimately this means that the compilation process is almost exactly the same
as an interactive session, with the printing step removed — a REL, if you will.

What matters to us for this discussion is that the compiler, Clojure's `eval`
function, works on Clojure data structures.

### Metadata

Clojure collections (as well as symbols and thus keywords) support a feature
called [metadata]. You can think of it as an extra field at the object level,
one that is not used for equality and hashcode computations, and is expected to
point to either `nil` or a Clojure map.

You can attach metadata to an appropriate value with the `with-meta` function,
and retrieve metadata with `meta`:

```clojure-repl
t.core=> (def t1 {:a 1 :b 2 :c "hello"})
#'t.core/t1
t.core=> (def t2 (with-meta t1 {:copied-from "t1"}))
#'t.core/t2
t.core=> (= t1 t2)
true
t.core=> (meta t1)
nil
t.core=> (meta t2)
{:copied-from "t1"}
t.core=>
```

Metadata can also be altered with `vary-meta`, which works like `update`, and
can be printed by setting `*print-meta*` to `true`.

```clojure-repl
t.core=> (set! *print-meta* true)
true
t.core=> t1
{:a 1, :b 2, :c "hello"}
t.core=> t2
^{:copied-from "t1"} {:a 1, :b 2, :c "hello"}
t.core=>
```

The `with-meta` function can be used when constructing values _from within
Clojure code_, but you may want to add metadata to forms at `read` time. This
is especially useful for metadata intended for consumption by the Clojure
compiler itself. As illustrated above, the reader macro for attaching metadata
is `^`, and it supports a few common shortcuts. The most important one in our
context here is the one used for type hints: `^` followed by either a Java
class or a string will attache the corresponding class (resolved with
`Class.forName` in the latter case) as the `:tag` entry in the metadata map:

```clojure-repl
t.core=> (set! *print-meta* false)
false
t.core=> (let [m ^String {:value "hello"}]
    #_=>   [m (meta m)])
[{:value "hello"} {:tag java.lang.String}]
t.core=>
```

The more general `^{:key val...}` notation lets one attach the entire metadata
map at once, which is useful if you want to set multiple keys.

When the Clojure compiler sees a `:tag` metadata entry, it uses it as a type
hint. But the values the compiler gets as inputs are not what we get directly
in our code, so it's important to understand how metadata gets consumed,
transformed and sometimes propagated by the compiler.

### Compiling with metadata

How the compiler uses metadata really depends on what it's attached to.
Metadata attached to nested values is just part of the surrounding value and is
transparently transmitted through by the compiler. For example:

```clojure-repl
t.core=> (set! *print-meta* true)
true
t.core=> (def t {:outer ^java.util.ArrayList {:inner "map"}})
#'t.core/t
t.core=> (meta (:outer t))
{:tag java.util.ArrayList}
t.core=>
```

In such cases, there isn't a particularly good reason to prefer the reader
macro to a more explicit call to `with-meta`, which has the advantage of making
it clear the annotation is not meant for the compiler (since the metadata is
then only created at evaluation time, i.e. after compilation, instead of by
the reader).

So when _does_ the compiler look at metadata?

There are essentially three cases that matter for performance:

- Global definitions (`def`, `defn`, etc.).
- Local definitions (`let`, `loop`, function arguments, etc.).
- Arguments to the `.` special form, and thus by extension any `.methodName`
  call.

Through this discussion it is important to remember that the compiler looks at
unevaluated forms. It does, however, _resolve_ symbols. Specifically, every
symbol that appears (unquoted) in a form the compiler is trying to compile
needs to either be resolved the a _local_ binding (introduced by `let`,
function argument, etc.) or be resolved to a global, fully-qualified Var.

If a symbol is resolved to a global Var, the metadata on the Var is what the
compiler will look at for the `:tag` field; if it is a local symbol, the
compiler will look at the metadata on the symbol itself. For function calls
(aka lists), the compiler will also look at the metadata on the first element.

### Type hint propagation

When a local variable is defined, it can get a type hint in three ways:

- The symbol itself is type hinted at definition time. This is generally
  frowned upon, but works.
- The initializer code form is type-hinted, in which case the type hint is
  propagated to the symbol.
- The initializer is a literal primitive value, in which case the local is
  automatically type-hinted with that type.

In the case of primitive-hinted `loop` locals, the compiler will check that the
corresponding `recur` arguments match the hinted type and warn if they don't
and `*warn-on-reflection*` is set.

Here are a few examples (with somewhat elided error messages):

```clojure-repl
t.core=> (set! *warn-on-reflection* true)
true
t.core=> (let [s "hello there"] (.charAt s 3)) ; inferred
\l
t.core=> (let [s (apply str "hello")] (.charAt s 3)) ; not inferred
Reflection warning, call to method charAt can't be resolved.
\l
t.core=> (let [^String s (apply str "hello")] (.charAt s 3)) ; hinted
\l
t.core=> (let [s ^String (apply str "hello")] (.charAt s 3)) ; hinted
\l
t.core=> (loop [i 0 c 0]
    #_=>   (if (== i 5)
    #_=>     c
    #_=>     (recur (inc i) (+ i c)))) ; inferred
10
t.core=> (loop [i 0 c 0]
    #_=>   (if (== i 5)
    #_=>     c
    #_=>     (recur (inc i) (apply + i [c]))))
recur arg for primitive local: c is not matching primitive,
  had: Object, needed: long
Auto-boxing loop arg: c
10
t.core=> (loop [i 0 c 0]
    #_=>   (if (== i 5)
    #_=>     c
    #_=>     (recur (inc i) (long (apply + i [c])))))
10
t.core=>
```

When a local is hinted, regardless of how it happened, the hint is propagated
to all uses of that local within its scope.

Global definitions are a bit more complicated. In a `def` form, the type hint
must be applied to the symbol, and the compiler will propagate it to the
corresponding Var:

```clojure-repl
t.core=> (def ^String s "hello")
#'t.core/s
t.core=> (meta #'s)
{:tag java.lang.String,
 :line 1,
 :column 1,
 :file "...",
 :name s,
 :ns #object[clojure.lang.Namespace 0x782f8453 "t.core"]}
t.core=> (.charAt s 4)
\o
t.core=>
```

Uses of the Var then behave as if they had that type hint, hence the lack of
reflection warning on that last `charAt` call.

Functions are a bit more complicated. The hints must be applied to the
arguments: the argument vector as a whole for the return value, and each symbol
in the argument list for the arguments themselves. For example:

```clojure-repl
t.core=> (defn sqrt-long ^double [^long n] (Math/sqrt n))
#'t.core/sqrt-long
t.core=> (meta #'sqrt-long)
{:arglists ([n]),
 :line 1,
 :column 1,
 :file "...",
 :name sqrt-long,
 :ns #object[clojure.lang.Namespace 0x782f8453 "t.core"]}
t.core=> (meta (-> (meta #'sqrt-long) :arglists first))
{:tag double}
t.core=> (set! *print-meta* true)
true
t.core=> #'sqrt-long
^{:arglists (^double [^long n]),
  :line 1,
  :column 1,
  :file "...",
  :name sqrt-long,
  :ns #object[clojure.lang.Namespace 0x782f8453 "t.core"]}
#'t.core/sqrt-long
t.core=> (set! *print-meta* false)
false
t.core=> (sqrt-long 4)
2.0
t.core=>
```

The "return type" hint is propagated by the compiler "upward", which is why in
the previous examples I had to use `(apply str "hello")` and `(apply + i [c])`,
to defeat the existing type hints on, respectively, `str` and `+`.

Note that the argument type hints are not checked at the call site:

```clojure-repl
t.core=> (sqrt-long (apply long [4]))
2.0
t.core=>
```

The argument hints are used to tag the arguments within the function body
itself, though.

Finally, we get to the `.` special form, and at this point there is not much
more to say about it. As explained [last week], in order to generate fast code,
it needs that every single argument be (locally) type hinted to the correct
type, whether that's because of an explicit type hint on a local binding, an
inferred one on a literal primitive (or String), or a propagated one from
global Vars and function calls.

### Classes and class names

In order to set a type hint, one needs to know the name of the class to hint
for. In most cases this will be an explicit Java class, and in those cases it's
better to use the class itself as the hint, as in `^java.lang.String` or
`java.util.List` (interfaces and abstract classes are valid "classes" too for
the purpose of this post). For brevity, you can `import` the relevant classes
in your `ns` declaration; `java.lang.*` is always imported, which is why I
could get away with `^String` in the examples above.

However, not all Java types can be represented neatly by a Class instance like
that. Specifically, primitives and arrays don't have literal class syntax in
Java, and thus neither do they in Clojure.

Clojure does not support the full complement of Java primitives as type hints;
it only supports `long` and `double`. For those, the Clojure compiler will
accept the objects `clojure.core.long` and `clojure.core.double` (which are
actually Clojure functions) as valid values for the `:tag` field. Since
`clojure.core` is required with no alias by default, we were able to just use
`^double` and `^long` in our `Math/sqrt` wrapper above.

Finally, arrays. The JVM has all sorts of weird rules around arrays, and
describing their classes is no exception to that. Clojure tries to make things
a little bit easier by providing readable shorthands for a few common cases.
For example, to type hint a binding as an array of doubles, one can use the
value `doubles`.

But as soon as you get into multidimensional arrays, you have to fall back to
the actual JVM names for their classes, so it's worth knowing about them. The
gist of it is you need to use a string type hint (which will be resolved with
`Class.forName`), and write is as a number of `[` equal to your nesting level
followed by, for primitives, a single letter, or, for objects, the class name
for the type of the elements. Note that, unlike Java collections, Java arrays
are _not_ type-erased, so you can have specific classes here.

The easiest way to retrieve the class name for a type of array is to use the
`make-array` function in a Clojure REPL:

```clojure-repl
t.core=> (.getName (class (make-array java.util.function.Function 1 2 3)))
"[[[Ljava.util.function.Function;"
t.core=> (.getName (class (make-array String 1 2 3)))
"[[[Ljava.lang.String;"
t.core=> (.getName (class (make-array java.util.function.Function 1 2 3)))
"[[[Ljava.util.function.Function;"
t.core=> (.getName (class (make-array Integer/TYPE 1 2 3)))
"[[[I"
t.core=> (.getName (class (make-array Long/TYPE 1 2 3)))
"[[[J"
t.core=>
```

The `make-array` function takes a type and any number of "sizes" and returns an
array with the given dimensions. Note that the array type name is independent
of the sizes, so any (positive integer) value is fine; what matters here is
the number of arguments.

For arrays of primitives, we still have the issue that there is no good way to
represent the class of a primitive value (because they don't have one), but we
can use the special values of `NonPrimitiveWrapper/TYPE` instead, as
illustrated for `int` and `long`.

### Code generation

If you are generating code, whether through macros at compile time or for
explicit consumption by `eval` at run time, you need to bear in mind that what
matters is the metadata on the forms seen by `eval`, not necessarily the ones
seen by the reader. Therefore, sometimes the reader macro is not going to be
appropriate.

Metadata reader macros do not play nicely with quasiquotes (backticks), so
you'll need to apply them explicitly with `with-meta` in generated code.

Here is an example, taken from code I wrote for last year's [Advent of Code]:

```clojure
(defn to-bindings
  ([m] (to-bindings m {:bindings (), :rbindings {}}))
  ([m state]
   (match m
     [:return v] [v state]
     [:bind ma f] (let [[v state] (to-bindings ma state)]
                    (to-bindings (f v) state))
     [:expr expr & t] (if-let [sym (get (:rbindings state) expr)]
                        [sym state]
                        (let [sym (with-meta (symbol (str "r-" (count (:rbindings state))))
                                             (when (seq t)
                                               {:tag (first t)}))]
                          [sym (-> state
                                   (update :bindings concat [sym expr])
                                   (update :rbindings assoc expr sym))])))))
```


### Hints & inference

Up to Clojure 1.10 (this is changing in 1.11), you are not allowed to type hint
a primitive local that has been inferred. For example:

```clojure-repl
t.core=> (let [arr ^longs (make-array Long/TYPE 3)
    #_=>       c (aget arr 1)]
    #_=>   (aset arr 0 ^long c))
Syntax error (UnsupportedOperationException) compiling at (...).
Can't type hint a primitive local

t.core=>
```

The issue here is that `c` is already inferred to be a `long`, because it is an
element of the array `arr` which is itself hinted as an array of longs.

This is usually not a problem in manually-written code, where you typically
want to have as few type-hints as possible anyway. In this case, one can just
choose to leave out the annotation on the last line:

```clojure-repl
t.core=> (let [arr ^longs (make-array Long/TYPE 3)
    #_=>       c (aget arr 1)]
    #_=>   (aset arr 0 c))
0
t.core=>
```

and everything works out (without reflection).

iBut it can be annoying in generated code, where the type inference can come
from optional code and therefore you have to choose between:

- Having your code only compile for some code paths, obviously not a great
  alternative.
- Having your code be slow on some code paths due to reflection. This works but
  is obviously annoying.
- Adding more code to your code generator to keep track of which bits of code
  you have emitted that could trigger inference, and only generate the type
  hint if it is actually needed. This can be a  non-trivial amount of extra
  complexity compared to always emitting the type hint.

As of Clojure 1.11, it will be valid tp type hint a primitive local _with its
type_.

### Conclusion

In most presentations, type hints are quickly skimmed over, because they're
almost always a means to an end. And while they are overall not very
complicated, there _are_ some nuances to them. I hope this blog will help shed
some light on the topic and give you a bit more confidence on how to approach
writing them.

[last week]: /posts/2022-02-20-opt-clj-6
[metadata]: https://clojure.org/reference/metadata
[Advent of Code]: https://adventofcode.com/2021
